>>>IN THE YEAR 2000THE BBC STARTED
>TO RECORD THE LIVESOF OF 25 CHILDREN.
>THEIR FAMILIES COME FROM ALLOVER THE UNITED KINGDOM
>AND ALL WALKS OF LIFE.
>HOW WILL THEIR PARENTSINFLUENCE THEIR LIVES?
>AND HOW WILL THEIR GENESAND THEIR ENVIRONMENT
>COMBINE TO FORMTHEIR PERSONALITY.
>THIS HUGE PROJECT WILLLAST FOR TWENTY YEARS.
>FOLLOWING THESECHILDREN AS THEY GROW
>TO FIND OUT WHATMAKES US WHO WE ARE.
>SUCCESS.
>WE'D ALL LIKE IT ANDTHERE IS ONE THING
>WE CAN ALL USETO GET IT.
>THE MOST POWERFULABILITY HUMANS HAVE
>IS TO MASTER NEW SKILLS.
>IT SETS US APART FROMEVERY OTHER ANIMAL.
>BUT HOW AND WHY DOWE LEARN THINGS?
>WHAT STOPS US FROM LEARNING,
>AND HOW CAN WE TRAIN OURBRAIN TO LEARN BETTER?
>TO SUCCEED INWHAT WE WANT TO DO,
>WE HAVE TO BE ABLE TOACQUIRE NEW SKILLS.
>I JUST CAN'T GET IT.
>>>WE'VE DESIGNED SOMESPECIAL TESTS TO HELP
>THE CHILD OF OUR TIMEFAMILIES AND YOU
>TO FIND OUT WHEREYOUR TALENTS,
>AND YOUR WEAKNESSES LIE.
>AT THE END YOU'LL HAVE YOURVERY OWN RECIPE FOR SUCCESS.
>TO GET IT WE'VE IDENTIFIEDSEVEN IMPORTANT SKILLS
>THAT CONTRIBUTE TO SUCCESS.
>IS MUSIC YOUR WATERLOO?
>OR ARE YOU LOGICAL?
>MAYBE YOU EXCEL ATUNDERSTANDING EMOTIONS.
>CAN YOU UNBLOCKYOUR CREATIVITY?
>OR PERHAPS YOU HAVEA WAY WITH WORDS?
>CAN YOU MAP READ?
>OR DO YOU MOVEWITH THE GROOVE?
>>>AND WITH THREE GENERATIONSOF OUR FAMILIES
>AND SOMEEXTRAORDINARY PEOPLE
>WE'LL DISCOVER HOW PERSONALITYAFFECTS YOUR CHANCE OF SUCCESS.
>AND IF YOU THINK YOUDON'T NEED ANY HELP,
>DOES THIS LOOK FAMILIAR?
>RIGHT, HERE WE GO SET DATE ANDTIME ON THE VIDEO,
>I HAVE ABSOLUTELY NO IDEA.
>THESE STUPID THINGS I...
>>>SETTING THE TIME ONA VIDEO RECORDER
>ISN'T PARTICULARLY DIFFICULT.
>SORRY.
>ON HERE?
>I'VE NEVER DONE IT.
>I'VE NEVER DONE IT.IT'S NO GOOD.
>>>AND THERE IS ALWAYSTHE INSTRUCTION MANUAL.
>I DON'T DO INSTRUCTIONS.
>>>BUT MANY OF US THINKIT'S WELL NIGH IMPOSSIBLE.
>MY HUSBAND ALWAYS DOES IT.
>>>AND SO GIVE UPWITHOUT REALLY TRYING.
>I'M JUST ABSOLUTELY USELESS.
>I DON'T CAREWHETHER THEY SET THEM UP,
>I REALLY JUST DON'T.
>I FAILED THE EXPERIMENT.
>>>THIS PROGRAM IS ABOUTHOW YOU CAN OVERCOME
>YOUR MENTAL BLOCKS.
>EACH OF THE TESTS WILLBE SCORED OUT OF 10.
>NOTE DOWN YOUR SCORE.
>AS THIS WILL HELP YOU TO WORKOUT YOUR RECIPE FOR SUCCESS.
>SO LETS BEGIN.
>UNDERSTANDING MUSICREQUIRES NOT ONLY A GOOD EAR,
>BUT CONCENTRATION,LOGICAL THINKING AND MEMORY.
>ALL USEFUL SKILLS FOR SUCCESS.
>SO HOW MUSICAL ARE YOU?
>YOU NEED TO DECIDE IFTHE NOTES BEING SUNG
>ARE GOING UP OR DOWN WHENYOU SEE THIS SYMBOL.
>READY?
>WRITE YOUR ANSWER DOWN NOW.
>LET'S FIND OUT WHATOUR FAMILIES THOUGHT.
>UP.
>DOWN.
>THE LAST BIT WAS GOING DOWN.
>[LAUGHTER]
>THEY WEREDEFINITELY GOING DOWN.
>I'M SEEING MY LACKOF MUSICAL TALENT.
>>>THE SINGING IS GOING DOWN.
>IF YOU GOT THE ANSWER RIGHT,GIVE YOURSELF 10 POINTS.
>MUSIC HAS SUCH A POWERFULEFFECT ON THE BRAIN
>THAT JUST LISTENING TO IT CANIMPROVE YOUR CONCENTRATION
>AND AFFECT YOUR EMOTIONS.
>AND LEARNING TO PLAYA MUSICAL INSTRUMENT
>MY POSSIBLY INCREASE IQ.
>BUT WHY CAN SOME OF USTURN OUR HAND TO ANYTHING
>WHILE OTHERS ARENOT SO ADAPTABLE?
>WHAT PART DOES AGEPLAY IN ALL THIS?
>HOW ABOUT THISFOR A CHALLENGE?
>WE'RE GOING TO SEE IF WE CANTEACH OUR FAMILIES TO FLY.
>ALL THREEGENERATIONS OF THEM,
>GRANDPARENTS, MOMS &DADS AND CHILDREN.
>EACH CONTESTANTHAS TO TAKE OFF,
>FLY AND THEN LAND ANAIRCRAFT AT HONG KONG'S
>NOTORIOUSLYDIFFICULT AIRPORT.
>THEY GET A SCOREOUT OF A HUNDRED.
>OOPS, PUSH AGAIN.
>>>OUR FIRST PILOT IS JAMIECRAVEN WHO'S JOINED BY SEVERAL
>OF THE OTHER CHILD OF OUR TIME CHILDREN.
>PASSING OFF READYFOR TAKEOFF.
>>>AND THEIR OLDERBROTHERS AND SISTERS.
>HE'S GOT ALL OFHIS FAMILY, HIS MOM,
>HIS DAD, HIS UNCLES HISAUNTS, THREE SISTERS,
>THE CAT, THE DOGAND HE'S TAKING
>THEM ALL ONHOLIDAY.
>AND THEY'RE ALLWORRIED TO DEATH.
>[BUZZ!]
>ERRRRR.
>>>FASTEN YOUR SEAT BELTS.
>THE NEXT GROUP IS MADEUP OF OUR MOMS AND DADS.
>BEEP BEEP!
>OH DEAR!
>>>THEY'RE IN THE PRIME OF THEIRLIVES AND SURELY CAPABLE
>OF TURNING THEIRHANDS TO ANYTHING.
>AND THEN, THERE ISTHE GRANDPARENTS.
>SUITABLE FOR ALL AGES.
>GOOD GOD ALL MIGHTY.
tts:textAlign="left">SOUNDS LIKE YOU DISAGREEWITH THAT STATEMENT.
>>>IT COULD BE A BUMPY RIDE.
>BUT WHO'LL BE TOP GUN?
>WE'LL BE BACKLATER TO FIND OUT.
>BEEP BEEP.
>PICKING UP NEW THINGS ISCRITICAL IN HOW EASY
>YOU FIND IT TO GETTHROUGH LIFE
>AND HOW RICH ANDENJOYABLE OUR LIVES ARE.
>SO WHY DON'T WE ALL PICKUP NEW THINGS EFFORTLESSLY?
>WHAT INFLUENCES HOWEASY WE FIND THIS?
>ONE THING THAT EITHER SPURS YOUON, OR STOPS YOU IN YOUR TRACKS
>IS WHETHER YOUR MOTIVATED.
>IT'S ONE OF THE MOST VALUABLEOF OUR PERSONALITY TRAITS.
>WOO TA DO DA WOO.
>LAUGHTER.
>HE'S BOUNCING.
>BARK BARK.
>>>RIHANNA'S PARENTS, TONIAAND ANDY ARE POLES APART
>WHEN IT COMES TO THEIRLEVEL OF MOTIVATION.
>ANDY DOES NOTHING HEDOESN'T WANT TO DO
>AND I DO EVERYTHINGTHAT HAS TO BE DONE.
>TONIA DOES EVERYTHING ANDI HATE DOING EVERYTHING.
>SIMPLE AS THAT.
>LAUGHING.
>>>TONIA IS A WORKING MOMWITH HER SIGHTS SET
>ON HER LONG TERM CAREER.
>HEAR THAT, THAT'S CRACKING.
>THEY'VE FORGOTTEN TO PUTTHE LINE OF TOP STITCHING ON.
>IT'S GOT THEWRONG LABELS IN IT.
>SO YOU'RE TELLINGONE OF US A FIB.
>AY-YI.
>>>BUT ANDY IS FIRST TO ADMIT
>THAT HE'S ONE OFLIFE'S EASY RIDERS.
>HISTORICALLY ANDY HAS ALWAYSSTARTED MARVELOUS PROJECTS.
>BUT TO GET HIM TOFINISH THINGS OFF
>ONCE THE INTITIALSORT OF LIKE DADAAA!
>THERE'S JUST NO CHANCE.
>>>ANDY'S LATEST VENTURE ISA SIGN MAKING BUSINESS.
>BUT HOW LONG WILLHE STICK WITH IT?
>THERE ARE SOME THINGS I'VESTARTED AND NOT SEEN THROUGH
>YAH I'LL AGREE WITH THAT.
tts:textAlign="left">FISHING,CAGE BIRDS.
>MINI MOTOR BIKES,QUADS, GO-CARTS.
tts:textAlign="left">THE KITCHEN.
>OFF ROAD BUGGIES.
tts:textAlign="left">THE CONSERVATORY.
>BUYING AND SELLING CARS.
tts:textAlign="left">ONCE THE NOVELTY IS GONE,YOU'RE NOT INTERESTED ANYMORE.
tts:textAlign="right">OW, KNIFE'S SHARP.
>>>LIKE MANY OF US, ANDYIS MOTIVATED BY NEW,
>EXCITING PROJECTS.
tts:textAlign="left">ANDY. YOU WANT TO CLEANREHANNA'S SHOES?
>>>NOT THE MUNDANE.
>WHERE ARE THEY?
tts:textAlign="left">HERE, THEY WEREON THE SHOE RACK.
>>>BUT TONIA'S MOTIVATIONCOMES FROM A DIFFERENT PLACE.
>YES I'M VERY MUCHDRIVIN BY RESPONSIBILITY.
>THERE ARE THINGS THATHAVE TO BE DONE
>AND SOMEBODY HASTO DO THEM
>AND IF NOBODY ELSE ISDOING IT, THEN YOU DO IT.
>JUST DAY TO DAY THINGSLIKE BILLS HAVE TO BE PAID.
>FOOD TO BE PREPARED.
>YOU KNOW,CLOTHES TO BE WASHED.
>SOMEBODY HAS TO DO IT.
>HOW CAN YOU POSSIBLY GETMOTIVATED HANGING WASHING OUT
>ON THE WASHING LINE?
>>>CLEARLY REHANNA'S PARENTS AREMOTIVATED BY DIFFERENT THINGS.
>BUT SHE KNOWSWHO'S THE BUSIEST.
>MOMMY IS THE BUSIEST.
>DADDY ISN'T BUSIEST.
>DADDY IS MOSTLY IN BEDSNORING AWAY.
>I CAN SIT AND WATCHMILK TURN TO YOGURT.
>DADDY IS REALLY LAZY.
>>>AND WITH THESEDIFFERENT ROLE MODELS,
>ONLY TIME WILL TELL WHOREHANNA WILL TAKE AFTER.
>YOU CAN SEE BITS OFBOTH OF US IN HER.
>THERE ARE TIMES WHENSHE'LL SIT AND PERSEVERE
>AND REALLY REALLYTRY HARD.
>I THINK THAT'S MORETONIA AT THAT AGE.
>AND YOU CAN SEE ATOTHER TIMES SHE HAS A GO,
>CAN'T DO IT IMMEDIATELY.
>[CRYING]
>BOOM.
>THAT'S ME.
>THAT'S MY SIDE I THINK.
>BUT LIKE ME I THINKSHE RUNS THE RISK
>OF BEING EXTREMELY DUTIFUL.
>WHICH I THINK WOULD BEBETTER IF IT WAS TEMPERED
>A BIT WITH ANDY'SPERSONALITY, SLIGHTLY.
>NOT VERY MUCH, JUST SLIGHTLY.
>>>WHY DO SOME OF US PERSEVEREWITH THINGS WE DON'T ENJOY,
>WHILE OTHERS START SOMETHINGONLY TO GIVE UP SOON AFTER?
>TO BE SUCCESSFUL, WE HAVETO KNOW WHAT DRIVES US.
>MOTIVATION HELPS USPUT IN ALL THE HOURS
>NECESSARY TO MASTERSOMETHING.
>BUT WHAT MAKES US MOTIVATED?
>IT'S ALL ABOUT REWARDS.
>BUT THEY DON'T WORK INTHE WAY WE MIGHT EXPECT.
>MOM LOOK, I JUSTFINISHED THE WHOLE PAGE.
>>>CHARLIE PLASTER LOVES DRAWINGAND SO DO HER CLASSMATES.
>WHO LIKES DRAWING?
>YEA!!
>>>WHAT HAPPENS IF WEGIVE THEM A PRIZE?
>WE DIVIDED CHARLIE ANDHER SCHOOL FRIENDS
>INTO THREE GROUPS WITHCHARLIE IN GROUP C .
>GROUPA WAS ASKED TODRAW FOR FIVE MINUTES,
>AND GOT NO PRIZE.
>GROUP B GOT AN UNEXPECTEDREWARD AT THE END
>OF THEIR DRAWING SESSION.
>THERE ALL SO GOOD I'MGOING TO GIVE YOU ALL A PRIZE.
>I'LL GIVE YOU ONE OFTHESE SPECIAL BALLS.
>>>IN GROUP C, CHARLIE'S GROUPWERE TOLD TO EXPECT A REWARD
>FOR THEIR DRAWINGSRIGHT FROM THE START.
>I'M GOING TO GIVE YOUA PRIZE.
>>>SO WOULD THE PRIZE HAVEANY EFFECT ON THE CHILDREN'S
>DESIRE TO DRAW ONCE THETEACHER LEFT THE ROOM?
>WITH TEACHER GONE, GROUP AWHO HAD RECEIVED NOTHING
>CARRIED ON DRAWINGAND CHATTING.
>THE SECOND GROUP WHO'D BEENGIVEN AN UNEXPECTED REWARD
>RETURNED TO THEIR DRAWINGWITH RENEWED ENTHUSIASM.
>BUT CHARLIE'S GROUP WANTEDTO DO ANYTHING BUT DRAW.
>TELLING THEM THEY WERE GOINGTO GET A REWARD AT THE START
>SEEMS TO HAVE STIFLED RATHERTHAN FUELED THEIR AMBITION.
>THEY SAW DRAWING AS AMEANS FOR GETTING A PRIZE
>RATHER THAN ENJOYINGIT FOR IT'S OWN SAKE.
>ONCE THEY HAD THEPRIZE, THEY LOST INTEREST.
>DOING SOMETHING WE ENJOYCAN BE ITS OWN REWARD.
>BUT IF WE DON'TENJOY SOMETHING,
>GETTING AN UNEXPECTEDREWARD WILL KEEP US GOING.
>IN MANY SITUATIONS, THEOCCASIONAL THANKS IS ENOUGH.
>RESEARCH SHOWS THAT GIVINGINTERMITTENT REWARDS
>TO CHILDREN CAN ENCOURAGEPERSEVERANCE IN ADULT LIFE.
>TIME FOR THE NEXT TEST.
>IF YOU WANT TO BE SUCCESSFUL,YOU NOT ONLY NEED
>TO BE MOTIVATED, YOU NEEDTO THINK LOGICALLY.
>OUR FAMILIES HAVE TODISCONNECT THE ALARM
>ON THIS DOOR TO ESCAPE FROMTHIS HIGH SECURITY ROOM.
>TO DO THIS, THEY HAVE TOSOLVE THREE LOGICAL PUZZLES.
>THE FIRST IS A GAME OFNOUGHTS AND CROSSES.
>YOU'RE PLAYINGNOUGHTS AND IT'S YOUR TURN.
>WHERE CAN YOU GO THATWILL GUARANTEE YOU A WIN?
>KEEP AN EYE ON THE TIMER.
>START NOW.
>WE'RE GONNA PUT IT HERE.
>BECAUSE IT THEYPUT A CROSS THERE,
>NOUGHT CAN WIN THERE.
>AND IF WE PUT A CROSSTHERE, NOUGHT CAN WIN THERE.
>>>THE ANSWER IS ON THETOP ROW.
>THE TOP CORNER GIVESTHIS WINNING COMBINATION.
>AND THE TOPMIDDLE GIVES THIS ONE.
>SCORE 2 POINTS IFYOU FOUND EITHER.
>SOLVING THIS PUZZLE GAVEOUR FAMILIES THEIR FIRST CLUE.
>DON'T CUT THE RED WIRE.
>DON'T CUT THERED WIRE.
>>>FOR OUR SECOND PUZZLEYOU HAVE TO WORK OUT
>WHAT'S MISSING FROMTHIS SEQUENCE.
>START NOW.
>TIMES UP.
>HOW DID YOU DO?
>BY JOE, YOUMIGHT HAVE DONE IT.
>THAT'S THE RIGHTANSWER THERE DARLING.
>>>THERE SHOULD BE ONE OFEACH SHAPE AND PATTERN
>IN EVERY ROW.
>SO THE ANSWER IS THE ISTHE LARGE STRIPEY SQUARE.
>2 POINTS IF YOU GOT IT RIGHT.
>DON'T CUT THE BLUE WIRE.
>>>AND NOW THE LAST PUZZLE.
>WHICH NUMBER SHOULD COME ATTHE END OF EACH SEQUENCE?
>YOU HAVE TO SOLVE BOTH PROBLEMSBEFORE THE TIMER RUNS OUT.
>START NOW.
>SO HOW DID YOU DO?
>ANDY'S GOT THE HANG OF IT
>AND FOUND A SOLUTIONTO THE BOTTOM ROW.
>1 AND 1 IS 2.
>2 AND 1 IS 3.
>2 AND 3 IS 5.
>5 AND 8 IS 13.
>>>SO THE ANSWER TO THEBOTTOM SEQUENCE IS 13.
>BUT YOU DON'T SCOREANYTHING UNLESS YOU GET
>THE SECOND QUESTIONRIGHT TOO.
>YOU HAD TO ALTERNATELY ADD1 AND THEN 3 TO THE NUMBERS
>AND THE ANSWER IS 20.
>YOU GET SIX POINTS IF YOUGET BOTH ANSWERS RIGHT.
>THE PRICES GOT IT WRONG ANDTIME RUN OUT FOR REHANNA.
>THE YOUNG FAMILY GOT IT RIGHTAND GOT THEIR FINAL CLUE.
>DON'T CUT THE GREEN WIRE.
>PUSH THE DOOR.
>YEAH. BYE
>>>THE OTHER FAMILIES JUSTHAD TO TAKE A GAMBLE.
>[ALARM SOUNDING]
>WE'LL BE BACK WITH SOME MORETEST FOR YOU AT HOME LATER.
>THERE'S PLENTY TO IMPROVE HOWNUMERATE OR LOGICAL WE ARE.
>ESTIMATING THE COST OF ABILL BEFORE IT ARRIVES,
>OR THE TIME AJOURNEY MIGHT TAKE,
>HELPS TO HONE THESE SKILLS.
>BUT EVEN THIS WON'TWORK FOR ALL OF US.
>FOR SOME PEOPLE, SOMETYPES OF LEARNING
>ARE ALWAYS GOINGTO BE A STRUGGLE.
>DYSLEXIA FOR EXAMPLE, MAKESREADING HARD FOR MANY OF US.
>BUT WE'RE GOING TOLOOK AT SOMETHING NEW.
>PAUL MOORCRAFT IS A MANWITH A SURPRISING PROBLEM.
>HE'S A PROFESSOROF JOURNALISM,
>AN AUTHOR, A WARCORRESPONDENT.
>HE WAS ALSO ANINSTRUCTOR AT SANDHURST
>AND WORKED FORTHE M.O.D.
>ALTHOUGH HE'S ONE OFLIFE'S SUPER ACHIEVERS,
>THERE'S SOMETHINGHE CAN'T DO.
>WELL IF YOU GIVE MEA MILLION POUNDS,
>I COULDN'T ACTUALLY TELL YOUWHAT MY PHONE NUMBER IS
>OR EVEN P.I.N. NUMBERS WHICHMAKES LIFE RATHER DIFFICULT.
>>>HE HAS DYSCALCULIA.
>A SORT OF NUMBER BLINDNESS.
>I CAN RECOGNIZE WHAT A NUMBER ISBUT WHEN YOU PUT THEM TOGETHER
>LIKE A PHONE NUMBER ORA TRAIN TIME TABLE,
>I HAVE DIFFICULTY SEEING THEM.
>AND CERTAINLY INCOPYING THEM OR HEARING THEM.
>10:28 SEE I'VEDOUBLE CHECKED
>YOU SEE I HAVE TO KEEP CHECKINGBECAUSE I CAN'T RETAIN NUMBERS.
>I'LL LOOK AT IT NOWAND I'LL TURN AWAY
>AND I WON'T BE ABLE TO REMEMBERWHAT THE NUMBERS ARE.
>THAT'S A PROBLEM.
>>>DEALING WITH NUMBERSAFFECTS EVERY PART OF LIFE.
>ALTHOUGH PAUL'S DIFFICULTY HASONLY RECENTLY BEEN RECOGNIZED
>BY SCIENCE, UP TO 1 IN20 OF THE POPULATION,
>MAY TO SOMEEXTENT SUFFER FROM IT.
>I DIDN'T KNOW WHEN I WASYOUNG I HAD THIS CONDITION.
>AND I USED TOWONDER AS A CHILD,
>WHAT THE HELL ISWRONG WITH ME?
>>>PAUL HAS LEARNED TO WORKAROUND THE DYSCALCULIA
>BUT THERE ARE SOME THINGSTHAT HE'LL NEVER WANT TO DO.
>OKAY NOW, THIS ISMY WORST NIGHTMARE.
>I'D RATHER HAVE MY TOENAILSPULLED OUT THEN DO THIS.
>>>SCIENTIST HAVE SHOWNTHAT A PART OF THE BRAIN
>IS UNDERDEVELOPED INPEOPLE WITH DYSCALCULIA.
>PROBLEMS WITH SIMPLECALCULATIONS ARE QUITE COMMON.
>WE TESTED OUR CHILDREN.
>THEY HAD TO SAY IF THE SPOTSTALLIED WITH THE NUMBERS.
>THEN WE TESTED THE ADULTS.
>I'M TRYING TO COUNT THESEDOTS AND MATCH THEM
>WITH THE NUMBER THAT'SHERE AS FAST AS I CAN.
>AND I KEEP GETTINGTHEM WRONG.
>NATHAN'S MOTHER RUTH DISCOVEREDSHE HAD DYSCALCULIA.
>I KNOW I'M USELESSAT MENTAL ARITHMETIC.
>I WOULD HAVE BEEN SURPRISEDIF I DIDN'T HAVE IT
>BECAUSE I KNOW THAT I'MUSELESS WITH NUMBERS.
>>>DYSCALCULIA IS A PROBLEMTHAT MANY OF US ARE BORN WITH
>AND WHICH MAY MAKESUCCESS MORE DIFFICULT.
>BUT THERE ARE LOTSOF OTHER REASONS
>WHY SUCCESS MAYESCAPE US.
>SOMETIMES IT'S BECAUSE OURPERSONALITY'S BEEN DAMAGED
>BY A CHILDHOODEXPERIENCE.
>TENNYSON STEVENSON ISHAVING A GREAT TIME AT SCHOOL.
>BUT FOR HIS MOM OLIVIA ITWAS A VERY DIFFERENT STORY.
>AND UNTIL TODAYSHE'S NEVER BEEN BACK.
>I WAS BULLIED AND PICKED ON.
>IF I NEEDED TO GO TO THETOILET I'D WANT TO PACK UP MY
>BAG AND MY PENCIL CASE ANDEVERYTHING BECAUSE I THOUGHT
>IF I COME BACKEVERYTHING WILL BE MISSING.
>YOU KNOW SOMEONE WOULDHAVE SPAT IN MY BAG.
>>>THE BULLYING HAD A DEVASTATINGEFFECT ON HER CONFIDENCE.
>I THOUGHT I WAS PROBABLYTHE WORST IN THE CLASS.
>AND I WOULDN'T PUT MYHAND UP AND ASK FOR HELP
>BECAUSE I WAS WORRIEDTHAT PEOPLE WOULD LAUGH.
>AND BEFORE I'D EVENATTEMPT A PIECE OF WORK
>I'D LOOK AT IT AND JUSTGO NO, I CAN'T DO THAT.
>I'M STUPID.
>CHARLIE, PUT YOURSHOES ON PROPERLY.
>I HOPE YOUR NOT IN A RUSH!
>>>CHARLIE PLASTER'SMOM TONI
>DIDN'T DO WELL ATSCHOOL EITHER.
>I DIDN'T ENJOYLEARNING IN SCHOOL.
>I WAS JUST SO BUSY BEINGIN THE RIGHT CROWD,
>GETTING ALONG WITHTHE GIRLS
>AND JUST MUCKINGAROUND REALLY.
>YOU KNOW, GOINGOUT ON FAG BREAKS
>AND IT'S A BITRIDICULOUS REALLY.
>>>GETTING PREGNANT ATSIXTEEN
>DIDN'T HELP HERSCHOOLWORK EITHER.
>I FELT THAT I WAS A FAILURE.
>THAT'S THE WAY IACTED IN SCHOOL.
>AND THAT'S THE WAYPEOPLE THOUGHT I WAS.
>AND I JUST FEELTHAT I JUST
>MADE A RUG FOR MEOWN BACK REALLY.
>>>BUT THE EFFECT ON TONI'SAND OLIVIA'S SELF ESTEEM
>AND WILLINGNESS TO LEARNCOULDN'T BE MORE DIFFERENT.
>I LOVED ART AND I'DREALLY LIKE TO GO BACK
>AND REDO MY GCSE.
>BUT I FEEL IN ACLASS SITUATION AGAIN,
>THAT I'D BE THE ONLY ONE INTHERE THAT WAS STRUGGLING.
>AND I'D BE THESTUPID ONE.
>>>THIS LACK OF CONFIDENCEHAS SPREAD TO OTHER AREAS
>OF OLIVIA'S LIFE.
>I FEEL THAT I'MRUBBISH AT EVERYTHING.
>AND SO NOW I FEEL LIKEI'M FAILING MY CHILDREN.
>WHAT DID YOU DOTODAY BABE?
>READING?
tts:textAlign="left">YAH DONE READING.
>>>BUT FOR TONI THESTORY IS QUITE DIFFERENT.
>IN 2004 SHE DECIDED TOTURN THE CLOCK BACK
>AND RETAKE HER GCSE.
>SHE NEEDS A C GRADE AT LEASTTO TRAIN FOR HER DREAM JOB
>OF BECOMING A TEACHER.
>I GOT A D.
>THAT MEANS I'LLHAVE TO RETAKE.
>I WAS GUTTED WHENI FOUND OUT.
>THEN TO ME, I JUST MAKETHE BEST OF WHAT I'VE GOT.
>AND I FELT RIGHT OKAY.
>WE'LL MOVE ON FROM THAT.
>>>AND THAT'S WHAT SHE DID.
>TONI HAD THE CONFIDENCETO START AGAIN
>AND TRAIN TO BE ACOMMUNITY CARER.
>I'LL FEEL PROUD ACTUALLYABOUT MY NEW JOB.
>I FEEL PROUD THAT I'MMAKING A DIFFERENCE TO PEOPLE.
>OH NO, SHE TOOK IT TO THEVET THE OTHER DAY DIDN'T SHE?
>I THINK IT'S GIVEN ME ALOT MORE CONFIDENCE AS WELL.
>>>AND THAT'S ONLYJUST THE BEGINNING.
>THE ULTIMATE DREAM WOULD BETO RUN MY OWN CARE AGENCY.
>AND THEN HOPEFULLY,EVENTUALLY DO A DEGREE.
>SO, I'M BEINGREALLY CLEVER.
>>>TONI HAS THE CONFIDENCETO SHAPE HER OWN FUTURE.
>BUT BULLYINGKNOCKED OLIVIA'S
>AND SHE'S FOUND ITDIFFICULT TO RECOVER.
>SHE'S DEVELOPEDLEARNED HELPLESSNESS.
>A BELIEF THAT SHE'S INCAPABLEOF ACQUIRING NEW SKILLS
>BROUGHT ON BYREPEATED FAILURE AT SCHOOL.
>BUT NOW SHE'S TACKLING IT.
>DEFINITELY WORTH COMINGDOWN HERE BECAUSE A FEAR
>IS ONLY A FEAR IF YOUDON'T CONFRONT IT.
>AS SOON AS YOUCONFRONT IT
>YOU SEE HOW IRRELEVANTIT REALLY IS.
>>>FEELING WE FAILEDKNOCKS OUR SELF BELIEF.
>IT'S IMPORTANT TORECOGNIZE ACHIEVEMENTS,
>TAKE RISKS AND NOT BEDISHEARTENED BY SETBACKS.
>ALL OF US HAVE ACQUIREDA LEARNED HELPLESSNESS
>ABOUT SOMETHING.
>FROM CHANGING A MOTORCARTIRE, TO LEARNING A LANGUAGE,
>OR SETTING A VIDEO.
>WELL, ANYTHING THAT'S BEENLEARNED CAN BE UNLEARNED.
>BUT ACHIEVING SUCCESSISN'T ALL ABOUT YOU.
>UNDERSTANDING OTHERPEOPLE IS A KEY INGREDIENT.
>GET READY FOR ANOTHER TEST.
>IT'S TIME TO GET ALITTLE PERSONAL.
>THIS MAGIC PICTURE OFME HAS BEEN PROGRAMMED
>TO SHOW SOME HUMANEXPRESSIONS.
>THIS ANIMATION SHOWS UNIVERSALCOMPONENTS OF OUR EXPRESSIONS.
>DISTILLED FROM PHOTOGRAPHSOF HUNDREDS OF PEOPLE.
>HOW GOOD ARE OURCHILDREN AT RECOGNIZING THEM?
>HELLO THERE.
>WHAT EMOTION DO YOUTHINK I'M FEELING?
>WHAT DO YOU RECKON?
>SAD.
>UM, HAPPY?
>HAPPY.
>HE LOOKSSERIOUSLY CONSTIPATED.
>>>OUR CHILDREN HAD NO PROBLEMRECOGNIZING HAPPY OR SAD.
>BUT WHEN THEY WERE SHOWNSOMETHING MORE COMPLEX,
>LIKE BOREDOM, AH DEAR, ITWAS A LITTLE DIFFERENT.
>SLEEPY.
>FED UP.
>MEAN.
>CONFUSED.
>I THINK HE'S GOT WIND.
>>>NOW IT'S YOUR TURN.
>WE'VE GOT THREE NEWEXPRESSIONS FOR YOU TO TRY.
>MAKE YOUR SELECTIONFROM THE OPTIONS
>ON THE RIGHT HANDSIDE OF YOUR SCREEN.
>READY?
>HERE IS THE FIRST.
>AND AGAIN.
>TIME FOR THE NEXT ONE.
>HERE'S THE SECOND.
>ONE MORE TIME.
>LAST ONE.
>ONE MORE CHANCE.
>YOU GET 3 POINTS FOR FEAR,
>3 FOR DISGUST
>AND 4 POINTS FOR ANGER.
>IT'S PARTICULARLY DIFFICULTBECAUSE THIS IS AN ANIMATION
>NOT A HUMAN FACE.
>BUT 1/5TH OF US HAVE THESEDIFFICULTIES SPOTTING COMPLEX
>EMOTIONS IN REAL PEOPLE.
>TEENAGERS BEING PARTICULARLYBAD AT RECOGNIZING ANGER.
>HOWEVER, YOU CANLEARN HOW TO READ FACES.
>WHEN PEOPLE ARE ANGRY,THEY NARROW THEIR LIPS
>AND LOWER THEIREYEBROWS.
>WHEN THEY'RE AFRAID, THEYTIGHTEN THE OUTSIDE
>OF THE MOUTH, WIDEN THE EYESAND RAISE THE EYEBROWS.
>AND WHEN THEY'RE DISGUSTED,THEY MOVE THEIR LIPS UPWARD
>AND WRINKLE THEIR NOSES.
>WELL IF THAT COMPUTERANIMATION FOOLED YOU,
>LETS SEE HOW CREATIVEYOU CAN GET WITH THIS ONE.
>WE LEARN AND ADAPT TOFACE LIFE'S CHALLENGES.
>HOW GOOD WE ARE AT DOING THIS,DEPENDS ON HOW CREATIVE WE ARE.
>YOU'RE BRAIN HASTO BE FLEXIBLE.
>HOW CREATIVE ARE OUR FAMILIESAND HOW CREATIVE ARE YOU?
>WE'RE GOING TO FIND OUTWITH THE HELP OF MY FRIENDS.
>HELLO.
>>>AND MY SELVES.
>USING THE VERY LATESTIN VIRTUAL REALITY,
>WE INTRODUCE OUR FAMILIES TOA RANDOM SELECTION OF OBJECTS
>AND CHARACTERS AND ASKTHEM TO GET CREATIVE.
>HE'S FALLING!
>TIME FOR ANOTHER TEST.
>JUST WRITE DOWN ABRIEF DESCRIPTION
>OF WHAT YOU'RE SEEINGON THE SCREEN NOW.
>KEEP AN EYE ON THE TIMER.
>WHICH OF THESE THREE OPTIONSBEST DESCRIBE YOUR ANSWER?
>DID YOU SIMPLYLIST THE OBJECTS?
>DID YOU MAKE A LISTBUT EMBELLISH IT?
>FOR INSTANCE BYDESCRIBING ME AS WAVING.
>OR DID YOU START TOMAKE UP A STORY
>CONNECTING THEOBJECTS IN SOME WAY.
>I'M AFRAID YOU SCORENOTHING FOR THE LIST ALONE.
>4 POINTS IF YOUEMBELLISHED IT.
>AND 10 POINTS FORMAKING CONNECTIONS
>BETWEEN THE OBJECTS.
>BEING CREATIVE IS ALLABOUT MAKING UNLIKELY
>ASSOCIATIONS BETWEEN THINGS.
>HE WAS DOING ANACROBAT SHOW.
>IS HE AN ACROBAT?
>NOW THAT I WOULDLIKE TO SEE.
>>>THE MORE ELABORATEOUR THINKING,
>THE MORE CREATIVEOUR IDEAS.
>HE CAN DO APENGUIN DANCE.
>A PENGUIN DANCE.
>>>IF WE WANT TOENCOURAGE CREATIVITY,
>TRY ASKING QUESTIONS.
>AND AVOID CRUSHINGOTHER PEOPLES IDEAS.
>MOST OF US DON'T REACHOUR CREATIVE PEAK
>UNTIL AT LEAST OURLATE THIRTIES.
tts:textAlign="left">I JUST SMASHEDYOUR FACE IN .
>>>TO BE CREATIVE, WE NEED AWIDE VARIETY OF EXPERIENCES
>TO DRAW ON AND WE DON'T HAVETHOSE UNTIL WE'RE OLDER.
>BYE BYE.
>BYE BYE ROBERT.
>>>INSIDE THE EXAMINATIONHALLS IN OXFORD,
>THE ABILITY TO TELLAN ELABORATE STORY
>USING UNCONNECTED CHARACTERS ANDOBJECTS AND THEN REMEMBER IT,
>IS PUSHED TO THEABSOLUTE LIMIT.
>IT'S THE ANNUAL WORLDMEMORY CHAMPIONSHIP
>AND BEN PRIDMORE KNOWSTHE KEY TO SUCCESS.
>I SUPPOSE YOU COULD CALL MESOME KIND OF STORY TELLER.
>IT'S A VERY RESTRICTEDKIND OF STORY THOUGH.
>I ONLY HAVE 2704DIFFERENT CHARACTERS
>WHO CAN FEATURE IN IT ANDQUITE A LOT OF THOSE
>ARE INANIMATE OBJECTSSO THE STORIES
>DON'T GET ALLTHAT THRILLING.
>READY, GO.
>>>BEN ASSOCIATES IMAGES WITH THETHINGS HE WANTS TO REMEMBER.
>USING THAT TECHNIQUE, HE'SBECOME THE WORLD RECORD HOLDER
>FOR MEMORIZINGBINARY NUMBERS.
>COULD WE PLEASEHAVE BEN COME UP.
>[APPLAUSE.]
>>>HE CAN MEMORIZE ARANDOM BINARY SEQUENCE
>OVER 3000 DIGITS LONGIN LESS THAN AN HOUR.
>IF YOU CAN'T IMAGINEWHAT IT LOOKS LIKE,
>HERE'S AN EXAMPLE.
>REMEMBERING 3000ONES AND ZEROS
>ISN'T AS COMPLICATEDAS IT MIGHT SOUND
>BECAUSE EACH GROUP OF10 ONES AND ZEROS
>I CONVERT INTO AMENTAL PICTURE.
>LIKE SAY A PACK OF CARDS ORA RUBBER DUCK OR A LAMP
>AND I PLACE THESEPICTURES ALONG A ROUTE
>AND SEE THEMIN MY HEAD.
>IT'S REALLY JUST REMEMBERING330 PICTURES IN MY HEAD.
>IT'S A LOT EASIER TOREMEMBER THAN A LOT
>OF STRAIGHT ONESAND ZEROS.
>>>SO IF YOU NEED TOREMEMBER SOMETHING,
>ASSOCIATE IT WITH A PICTUREBECAUSE THE BRAIN IS VERY GOOD
>AT REMEMBERINGVISUAL IMAGES.
>EVERYBODY HAS THE POTENTIALTO USE THEIR BRAIN
>TO A GREATER EXTENTTHEN THEY ACTUALLY DO.
>WHEN IT COMES TO MEMORY INPARTICULAR I DON'T THINK
>ANYBODY HAS EVEN SCRATCHED THESURFACE OF WHAT'S POSSIBLE.
>>>BEING GOOD AT TELLING STORIESHELPS IMPROVE OUR MEMORY.
>AND IT ALSO HELPS USBE MORE EXPRESSIVE,
>CONVINCING IN OURARGUMENTS AND BE ABLE
>TO MAKE PEOPLEUNDERSTAND US.
>ALL VITAL FORSUCCESS.
>IT'S TIME FORYOUR NEXT TEST.
>WE'RE GOING TO LOOK ATYOUR STORY TELLING SKILLS.
>PROJECTED ONTO THEWALLS OF THIS ROOM
>YOU'LL SEE 4 CLIPS THATSHOW CHARLIE PLASTER
>GETTING READY TO GO TO SCHOOL.BUT THEY'RE ALL MIXED UP.
>YOU'VE GOT TO PUT THEM BACK INTHE RIGHT ORDER IN 15 SECONDS.
>HERE WE GO.
>HOW DID OUR FAMILIESGET ON?
>CHARLIE GOT OUT OFBED, GOT DRESSED,
>CAME DOWNSTAIRSWITHOUT HER TIE,
>RETURNED TO GET HER TIE
>AND FINALLY CAME DOWNSTAIRSHER UNIFORM COMPLETE.
>SO THE CORRECTANSWER WAS D B A AND C.
>10 POINTS IF YOU GOTTHEM IN THE RIGHT ORDER.
>NOTHING IF YOUDIDN'T GET ANY.
>NARRATIVE IS FUNDAMENTALTO EFFECTIVE COMMUNICATION.
>SO IT'S WORTH IMPROVING.
>LISTEN TO ANYONE WHOGIVES GOOD SPEECHES
>OR TELLS A GOOD STORY.
>WORK OUT WHAT THEY'RE DOINGAND WHAT EFFECT IT HAS ON YOU.
>PICKING UP NEW SKILLS ISSOMETHING WE COULD ALL DO.
>BUT IS IT EASIER ATSOME AGES?
>REMEMBER OURFLIGHT SIMULATOR?
>LET'S SEE HOW OURFAMILIES ARE GETTING ON.
>THIS IS WHEREYOU PANIC YOU SEE.
>OUR LIFE IN YOUR HANDS.
>GET THE AMBULANCE.
>>>OUR GRANDPARENTS AREDOING PRETTY BADLY.
>WITH SEVERAL MAJOR INCIDENTSTHEY'RE AVERAGING
>A SCORE OF ABOUT60 OUT OF 100.
>I'M TOO TRAVEL SICK.
>SHE'S REALLY TRAVEL SICK.
>>>I WOULDN'T WANTTO FLY WITH DOT,
>JAMIE'S GRANDMOTHER.
>SHE'S GOT THE LOWEST SCORE.38 OUT OF 100.
>AS FOR THE FIVE YEAR OLDS,IT'S ALL TOO COMPLICATED.
tts:textAlign="left">THAT'S THE WRONG WAY, YOUCAN'T SCRATCH YOUR HEAD
tts:textAlign="left">AT THIS STAGEHELENA.
tts:textAlign="left">TWO HANDS.
>>>THEY SCORE IN THEFIFTIES.
>BUT ONLY WITH HELPFROM CAPTAIN GRANDSHAW.
>AT THIS STAGE IT'S THE OLDERCHILDREN AND THE PARENTS
>WHO ARE COMPETINGFOR TOP PLACE.
>BOTH SCORING INTHE 80s AND 90s.
>WE'LL BE BACK TO SEE WHOBECOMES OUR BEST FLYER.
>IF THERE IS GOING TOBE ANY IMPROVEMENT,
>THEY'RE GOING TOHAVE TO SHARPEN
>THEIR SPACIALAWARENESS SKILLS.
>SPACIAL AWARENESS REQUIRESTHE ABILITY TO IMAGINE,
>VISUALIZE AND REMEMBER.
>YOU CAN TEST YOUR SKILLSAT HOME IN OUR NEXT TEST.
>ONE OF OUR MOST CHALLENGING.
>YOU HAVE TO HELP HELENA FINDTHE PRIZE IN THE CENTER
>OF OUR FIENDISH MAZE BYUSING A MAP AS YOUR GUIDE.
>YOU BOTH START HERE.
>THE DOT RIGHT THERE.
>>>WE ARE GOING TO ASK YOUWHICH WAY SHE SHOULD TURN
>THREE TIMES.
>LEFT OR RIGHT.
>HAVE A LOOK AT THE MAP NOWAND VISUALIZE THE ROUTE.
>ON THE SCREEN YOU WILL SEE AMAP THAT WILL GET YOU GOING
>BUT YOU WILL HAVETO WATCH HELENA.
>DO YOU KNOW WHEREYOU ARE?
>SHOULD SHE GOLEFT OR RIGHT?
>ANSWER NOW.
>I THINK IT'S THIS WAY.
>>>IF LIKE HELENAYOU CHOSE RIGHT,
>WELL DONE.
>OKAY, DECISION TIME AGAIN.
>LEFT OR RIGHT?
>ANSWER NOW.
>YOU TURN RIGHT AGAIN.
>LAST ONE.
>LEFT OR RIGHT?
>ANSWER NOW.
>THIS WAY?
>NO.
>>>IF YOU ANSWEREDLEFT, YOU'D BE WRONG.
>IF YOU ANSWERED RIGHT,CONGRATULATIONS
>YOU FOUND THE TREASURE.
>DOESN'T FEEL VERY HEAVY.
>HOW DID YOU SCORE?
tts:textAlign="left">YOU SHOULD HAVE MADETHREE RIGHT TURNS.
tts:textAlign="left">IF YOU DID YOU GET10 POINTS.
tts:textAlign="left">TWO RIGHTS AND A LEFTSCORES YOU 6 POINTS.
tts:textAlign="left">ONE RIGHT AND TWOLEFTS SCORES 2 POINTS.
tts:textAlign="left">AND IF YOU SAID THREELEFTS YOU GET NOTHING.
>THREE, TWO, ONE GO.
>>>WHAT THIS TEST SHOWS ISYOUR POWER OF VISUALIZATION
>AND SENSE OF SPACE.
>IF YOU ARE GOOD ATTHIS TEST LIKE MEAGAN,
>IT'S POSSIBLE YOU HAVEAN INHERENT ABILITY
>HARDWIRED INTOYOUR BRAIN.
>ALEX AND NATHAN..
>WHERE'S THE WAY!?
>>>DIDN'T DO TO WELL.
>TO DEVELOP AND USE OUR SPACIALAWARENESS TO ITS FULL EXTEND,
>WE NEED ANOTHERASPECT OF OUR PERSONALITY.
>THE ABILITY TOCONCENTRATE.
>[SIREN SOUND]
>>>I HAVEN'T BEEN NICKED.
>I'VE JUST BORROWED THIS CARFROM PC ALASTAIR BAYLISS.
>AN ADVANCED POLICE DRIVERWHO'S GOING TO HELP
>WITH A SIMPLE EXPERIMENTTO SHOW HOW IMPORTANT
>CONCENTRATION IS IFWE'RE GOING TO SUCCEED.
>THIS EYE TRACKERDEVICE USES TWO CAMERAS.
>ONE TO RECORD MY POINTOF VIEW AND THE OTHER
>THE MOVEMENT OF MY EYE.
>WHEN THE TWO IMAGES MERGE,
>THE POINT I'M ACTUALLY LOOKINGAT IS MARKED WITH A RED CIRCLE.
>WE ARE GOING TO SEEHOW FAST PC BAYLISS
>CAN WEAVE BETWEENTHESE CONES.
>SOMETHING HE'SBEEN TRAINED TO DO.
>SEE HOW HEFOCUSES ON THE CONES.
>JUST UNDER 11 SECONDS.
>PRETTY GOOD.
>BUT WHAT HAPPENS IF WEMAKE IT A BIT HARDER
>BY INTERFERING WITHHIS CONCENTRATION?
>NOW I'M GOING TO ASK YOU TODO THE SAME THING AGAIN
>BUT I'M GOING TO TRYAND DISTRACT YOU
>BY ASKING YOUDIFFICULT QUESTIONS.
>TO SEE HOW IT AFFECTSYOUR DRIVING ABILITY.
>LETS GO.
>>>SO AS WE COME UPTO THE FIRST GATE,
>I WANT YOU TO TAKE 30 AWAYFROM 1000 REPEATEDLY
>STARTING WITH 970.
>970, 940, 910,880, 850,
>BUSTED
>>>BECAUSE PC BAYLISS COULDN'TCONCENTRATE ON DRIVING ALONE,
>HE LOST CONTROL EVEN THOUGHHE WAS DOING SOMETHING
>THAT SHOULD HAVEBEEN SECOND NATURE.
>NOTHING LIKE THE DEGREE OFCONTROL THAT YOU HAD BEFORE.
>>>WHY COULDN'T HE DO IT?
>IT'S ALL IN THE EYES.
>LOOK WHAT HAPPENED WHENI ASKED THE QUESTION.
>I WANT YOU TO TAKE 30AWAY FROM 1000 REPEATEDLY.
>PC BAYLISS COULDN'TFOCUS ON HIS SIGHT,
>THE CONES AND THINK ABOUTTHE ANSWER AT THE SAME TIME.
>THE ACT OF THINKING MADEHIM LOOK AWAY INVOLUNTARILY.
>THIS PHENOMENON, GAZEAVERSION IS THE MAIN REASON
>WHY TAKING A PHONE CALL BEHINDTHE WHEEL IS SO DANGEROUS.
>BUT HOW POTENTIS THIS REFLEX?
>CAN WE CONCENTRATE ONA SIMPLER PROBLEM
>WHILE WE'RE JUST LOOKINGAT ANOTHER PERSON?
tts:textAlign="left">I' M GOING TO ASK YOUSOME QUESTIONS OKAY?
tts:textAlign="left">AND WHILE YOU'REANSWERING THE QUESTIONS,
tts:textAlign="left">I WANT YOU TO KEEPLOOKING AT MY FACE.
tts:textAlign="left">WHILE YOU'RE THINKINGABOUT YOUR ANSWER.
tts:textAlign="left">OKAY?
tts:textAlign="left">JAMIE, A KITTENGROWS UP TO BE A CAT.
tts:textAlign="left">CAN YOU TELL ME WHAT ALAMB GROWS UP TO BE?
>A CHICKEN.
>>>THEY'RE FINDING IT DIFFICULTTO ANSWER THE QUESTIONS.
tts:textAlign="left">WHAT DOES A LAMBGROW UP TO BE?
>A BIG LAMB.
tts:textAlign="left">WELL DONE.
>>>WHAT HAPPENS IF WEENCOURAGE THEM TO LOOK AWAY?
tts:textAlign="left">THIS TIME INSTEAD OFLOOKING AT MY FACE,
tts:textAlign="left">I WANT YOU JUST TO LOOKAT THAT WALL OVER THERE.
tts:textAlign="left">OKAY, CAN YOUDO THAT?
tts:textAlign="left">JAMIE, CAN YOU TELL MEWHAT YOUR FAVORITE COLOR IS?
>RED.
tts:textAlign="left">AND WHYIS THAT?
>BECAUSE IT'SLIVERPOOL'S COLOR.
tts:textAlign="left">CAN YOU TELL ME 3 THINGSTHAT COME IN A BOTTLE?
tts:textAlign="left">LOOK AT THE BOXWHILE YOU HAVE A THINK.
>AVENA, ORANGEJUICE AND LEMON AID.
>>>FACES ARE PARTICULARLYDISTRACTING.
>WE ARE PROGRAMED TOTRY TO READ THEM
>BECAUSE THEY'RE THE BASISOF ALL HUMAN INTERACTION.
>SO IT'S DIFFICULT TOCONCENTRATE ON A FACE
>AND THINK ABOUT AQUESTION SIMULTANEOUSLY.
>LOOKING AWAY RELEASES OURMIND FOR ABSTRACT THOUGHT.
>WE CAN TRAIN OURSELVES TOCONCENTRATE BY LOOKING AWAY
>FROM PEOPLE AND FROMOBJECTS WHICH DISTRACT US.
tts:textAlign="left">CAN YOU TELL ME WHATYOUR DAD'S JOB IS?
>HE MAKESTHINGS FOR US.
>>>GAZE AVERSION GIVESA FASCINATING INSIGHT
>INTO AN ASPECT OFTHE HUMAN MIND.
>THE UNEXPECTED ROLE OURSENSES PLAY IN HOW WE LEARN.
>ALL OUR SENSES ARELINKED ALL THE TIME.
>AND THE BETTER WECAN HARNESS THEM,
>THE BETTER WE LEARN.
>ONE EXCEPTIONAL GROUP OF PEOPLECOULD TELL US HOW THIS WORKS.
>YOU'VE GOT TRUMPETSIN THE TOP LAYER.
>A LOT OFTRIANGULAR SHAPES.
>AND MANY ORANGE ANDYELLOW.
>VERY LEMONY YELLOW.
>>>ARTIST JANE MCKAIDOESN'T JUST HEAR MUSIC,
>SHE ALSO SEES IT.
>WHEN I'M LISTENING TO MUSIC,I WOULD SAY THAT THE MAIN
>SENSATION I GET AT COLOR, ANDMAINLY THE COLOR TAKES OVER.
>AND SHAPES,DEFINITELY SHAPES.
>>>JANE HAS SYNESTHESIA.
>HER HEARING AND HER SIGHTARE STRANGELY CONNECTED.
>WE HAVE THETRUMPETS BACK IN AGAIN.
>THIS WONDERFUL HORNPLAYING AT ONE POINT
>WHICH IS LIKE A GREAT BIGSHEET OF LEMON YELLOW.
>>>BUT PUB LANDLORD JAMESWANERTON GETS A RATHER
>DIFFERENT SENSATIONWHEN HE LISTENS TO MUSIC.
>I'M GETTINGSHORT CAKE FLAVORS.
>IT'S ALL SWEET.
>PINEAPPLE CHUNKS.
>I EVEN LIKE THE GAPS IN THEREBECAUSE YOU GET THE GAP
>AND THEN YOU GET A LOAD OFCHOCOLATE THROWN ON TOP OF IT
>AND OH IT'S LOVELY.
>WHEN I HEAR MUSIC I GET ASHARP INVOLUNTARY TASTE
>ON THE TONGUE.
>I GET THE TEXTURE OFWHATEVER FOOD IT IS.
>AND SOMETIMES I EVEN GET THETEMPERATURE SO IT'S THE WHOLE
>TASTING EXPERIENCE.
>THE WHOLE THING'S THERE.
>>>FOR JAMES, NOT JUSTMUSIC BUT WORDS
>SUCH AS THE DAY OF THE WEEKCAN TRIGGER HIS SYNESTHESIA.
>MONDAY IS LIKE A RUBBERBAND KIND OF TASTE
>AND TUESDAY IS OPAL-FRUITKIND OF FLAVOR.
>I ALWAYS GET THEFLAVOR OF OPAL-FRUITS
>THROUGHOUT THEENTIRE DAY.
>WEDNESDAY SORT OFLIKE A CAKE FLAVOR.
>THURSDAY I'LL GETABSOLUTELY NOTHING FOR.
>FRIDAY IS SPAM.
>VERY STRONG SPAM.
>SATURDAY IS BACON.
>AND SUNDAY IS ACOLD ORANGE JUICE.
>IT'S BIZARRE.
>>>BUT HAVING SYNESTHESIA CANGIVE AN UNEXPECTED ADVANTAGE.
>WHAT SYNESTHESIA HASDONE IN THE PAST FOR ME
>IS GIVEN ME AN EXTRA PASSIONFOR LEARNING NEW WORDS.
>OBVIOUSLY IF THERE IS AWORD THERE THAT I THINK
>OH THAT SOUNDS BEAUTIFUL THENI'LL START USING IT.
>SCHOOL, I GOT ONREALLY WELL AND LOVED IT.
>IT GAVE ME A LOVELYMARMALADE KINDA FLAVOR.
>AND THE GERMAN IGOT AT THAT LEVEL
>STUCK WITH MEWORD FOR WORD.
>>>BUT FOR JAMES,ASSOCIATING NOISES,
>NAMES AND WORDS WITH TASTESCAN SOMETIMES GET TOO MUCH.
>EVERY EVENING I FIND ITDIFFICULT TO GO INTO
>THE FRONT BAR BECAUSE OFNAMES BECOME A FLAVOR
>AS WELL AS A PERSON.
>JAM SANDWICH.
>MARMITE SANDWICHESFOR INSTANCE.
>PROCESSED PEAS, TINCARROTS, STUFF LIKE THAT.
>BURGERS, FISH FINGERS.
>>>THE FACT THAT SO MANY TASTESARE ROUTED IN JAMES' CHILDHOOD
>GIVES AN INSIGHT INTOTHE WAY WE ALL MAY LEARN.
>THE THEORY IS THAT WE AREALL BORN WITH SYNESTHESIA.
>WITH MANY OF OURSENSES INTERCONNECTED.
>SO WHEN A BABY HEARS HIS MOTHERSVOICE FOR THE FIRST TIME..
tts:textAlign="left">HEY.
>>>HE MAY ASSOCIATEA COLOR, A SMELL,
>A FEELING OR EVEN A TASTEWITH IT TO HELP HIM REMEMBER.
>BUT AS HE GROWS THE LINKS BECOMEUNNECESSARY AND ARE LOST.
>BUT FOR SYNESTHETICS,THE LINKS REMAIN.
>IT HAS MANYMANIFESTATIONS.
>ONE OF THE MOST COMMON ISSEEING LETTERS AND NUMBERS
>AS DIFFERENT COLORS.
>IF YOU LOOK AT THIS DO YOUSEE A SHAPE IN THIS PICTURE?
>IF YOU SAW THIS TRIANGLE, ITCOULD BE BECAUSE YOUR MIND
>IS REGISTERING THE TWOSAS A DIFFERENT COLOR
>AND THAT'S ONE INDICATIONOF SYNESTHESIA.
>ALTHOUGH NONE OF OUR FAMILIESCOULD SEE THE PATTERN,
>CALVIN THURNING'SMOM HELEN,
>HAD AN UNEXPECTEDREVELATION FOR US.
>OHHHHHHH CALVIN!
>WHEN I'M LISTENING TOMUSIC I KINDA SEE THESE THICK,
>GREEN SLUDGE BUT ALL SWIRLYAND THAT'S A BIT BIZARRE
>BUT I JUST ASSUMED THATEVERYBODY MUST SEE
>PATTERNS OR SOMETHING SONOTHING UNUSUAL FOR ME
>FOR IT TO BE ASSOCIATEDWITH MUSIC.
>>>BUT DOES SYNESTHESIA HAVE ANYRELEVANCE FOR THE REST OF US?
>CAN WE LEARN MOREEFFECTIVELY BY CONSCIOUSLY
>USING ALL OF OURSENSES?
>NONE OF OURFAMILIES SPEAK POLISH.
>BUT PERHAPS WE CANCHANGE ALL THAT.
>THEY HAVE JUSTABOUT A MINUTE
>TO LEARN THE POLISH FOR FIVEFAMILIAR FOODS.
>LEMONS
>HONEY
>APPLES
>CAKES
>AND SWEETS
>THEY CAN LOOK BUTTHEY CAN'T TOUCH.
>CUKIERKI, WE LIKE THOSE.
>>>TIMES UP.
>SO HOW MANY OF THEPOLISH WORDS DID THEY LEARN?
tts:textAlign="left">YOU REMEMBER WHATTHIS ONE'S CALLED?
>NO.
tts:textAlign="left">DO YOU REMEMBER?
tts:textAlign="left">WHAT ABOUT THIS ONE?
>[LAUGHTER]
tts:textAlign="left">NO IDEA?
>NO.
tts:textAlign="left">HOW BOUT THOSE?
tts:textAlign="left">YOU CAN'T REMEMBER.
>>>IT'S CLEAR THAT OURFIVE YEAR OLDS STRUGGLE
>TO REMEMBER ANYNEW WORDS.
>SO WE CHANGED THE RULES.
>THIS TIME, AS WELL AS BEING ABLETO SEE A NEW SELECTION OF FOOD,
>THEY'RE ALSO ABLE TO SMELLTASTE AND TOUCH IT.
>THEY'VE GOT BREAD,PINEAPPLE, MINTS,
>GRAPES AND CHEESE.
>[RING]
tts:textAlign="right">I LIKE ALLOF THEM.
>>>SO WAS THERE ANIMPROVEMENT?
tts:textAlign="left">WHAT WASTHIS MEG?
>CHLEB?
tts:textAlign="left">CHLEB.
>CHLEB.
>WINO...WINOGRONA.
>YES.
tts:textAlign="left">WHAT WAS THAT?
>MIENTOWY.
>>>BY USING THEIR SENSES,ALL OUR CHILDREN IMPROVED.
>MEAGAN DAVIS DIDTHE BEST
>REMEMBERING 3 OUT OFTHE 5 NEW WORDS.
>SMELL SOMETHING NICE WHEN YOUARE TRYING TO LEARN SOMETHING
>A WIF OF THE SAME SMELLMIGHT HELP YOU TO RECALL IT.
>BUT FOR OUR FAMILIES INTHE FLIGHT SIMULATOR,
>THEY AREN'T GETTINGANY SMELLS TO HELP THEM.
>UNLESS OF COURSE YOUCOUNT THE SMELL OF FEAR.
>I GOING TO CRASH.
>>>WHICH GENERATIONDID THE BEST?
>WE KNOW THEGRANDPARENTS STRUGGLED.
>WELL PUT IT THIS WAY,I WON'T MAKE A PILOT.
>DOT GOT 38.
>CAROL 59 AND JOHN 61.
tts:textAlign="left">YOU STILL WITHUS JOHN?
tts:textAlign="left">YOU SEE HOWHE'S DEAD.
>>>THE OLDER WE GET,THE HARDER WE FIND IT
>TO THINK ON THE SPOT.
>AND THE FIVE YEAROLDS FAIRED EVEN WORST.
>IN SPITE OF THEIR ENTHUSIASM,THEY LACKED COORDINATION,
>AND EXPERIENCE.
>THE COMPETITION WAS ALWAYSGOING TO BE BETWEEN
>THE OLDER CHILDRENAND THE PARENTS.
tts:textAlign="left">PUSH THE NOSEFORWARD
>>>IAN CRAVEN DIDVERY WELL.
>HE DRIVES LORRIESFOR A LIVING.
>MAKING THE MOVE TO FLY APLANE WAS MUCH EASIER FOR HIM.
>IT USES A VERYSIMILAR SET OF SKILLS.
>HE'D SCORED 91, THE TOPSCORE OF THE DAY.
>CONNECTIONS IN HIS BRAIN, MAKETHIS TYPE OF ACTIVITY EASIER.
tts:textAlign="left">I DIDN'T THINK IT WAS GOING TOBE QUITE THIS TECHNICAL.
>>>FARMER GAMER DAVISDIDN'T DO QUITE AS WELL.
tts:textAlign="left">AH, I'M GOING DOWNTHE WRONG RUNWAY.
>>>SHE MANAGED JUST61 OUT OF 100.
>BEING FARMERS YOUR NOT WORRIEDABOUT GETTING IN THE GRASS BUT
>I TELL YOU IT TAKES THEUNDERCARRIAGE CLEAN OFF.
>[LAUGHTER]
tts:textAlign="left">YOU'RE MAKING ITLOOK VERY EASY.
>>>FOR THE OLDER CHILDREN,BROUGHT UP SURROUNDED
>BY NEW TECHNOLOGY, FLYING THEPLANE WAS LESS OF A CHALLENGE.
>THEY SCORED INTHE EIGHTIES.
>BUT ROBERT CRAVIN EQUALLEDHIS DAD WITH A SCORE OF 91.
>THE EAISEST TIME TO LEARN ANEW SKILL IS IN OUR TEENS
>AND EARLY TWENTIES.
>TEENS HAVE COORDINATION,COMPETENCE AND MOTIVATION.
>THE BEST FOR ANY OF USIS TO BE ADVENTUROUS
>AND MENTALLY FLEXIBLEENOUGH TO TRY NEW THINGS.
>YOU CAN TEACH ANOLD DOG NEW TRICKS.
>IT JUST MIGHT TAKE ALITTLE BIT LONGER.
>AND NOW FOR OURLAST CHALLENGE.
>WE'RE GOING TO TEST HOWPHYSICALLY ADEPT YOU ARE.
>BUT YOUR GOING TO HAVE TOGET YOUR DANCING SHOES ON.
>JOIN IN AND TRY TOFOLLOW THE DISCO MOVES.
>YOU HAVE TO FOLLOWIT IF YOU CAN
>FOR THE DURATION OFTHE TIMER.
>OKAY, GET READYFOR YOUR NEXT MOVE.
>REMEMBER TO KEEP IT UP IF YOUCAN FOR THE WHOLE COUNTDOWN.
>HERE WE GO. LAST ONE.
>SO HOW DID YOU DO?
>DID YOU COMPLETE THEWHOLE DANCE ROUTINE?
>DID YOU HAVE A GOBUT GIVE UP?
>OR DID YOU JUSTSIT THIS ONE OUT?
>YOU GET THE FULL 10POINTS FOR THE FIRST,
>6 POINTS FOR THE SECONDAND NOTHING FOR THE THIRD.
>ONE TECHNIQUE WE CAN USE TOIMPROVE OUR PHYSICAL ABILITIES
>IS TO SIMPLY VISUALIZE THEMOVES EITHER OF A DANCE
>OR ANYTHINGINVOLVING MOVEMENT.
>AND THEN RUN THEM OVERAND OVER AGAIN IN OUR MIND.
>THE NEXT TIME WEDO THE REAL THING,
>IT BECOMES EASIER.
>WE ALL HAVE A UNIQUEBLEND OF DIFFERENT TALENTS.
>SOME INHERITEDFROM OUR PARENTS,
>SOME LIFE HAS TAUGHT US.
>OF COURSE THESE TEST WEREJUST DESIGNED TO BE FUN
>BUT THE SCORE YOUGOT SHOULD GIVE YOU
>AT LEAST AN INDICATIONOF WHAT YOU NEED
>FOR YOUR OWN RECIPEFOR SUCCESS.
>THE IMPORTANT THING TOREMEMBER IS THAT THE BRAIN
>IS A LEARNING MACHINE.
>IT'S NEVER FIXED ANDIT'S ALWAYS CHANGING.
>AND THAT MEANS EVERYONEOF US NO MATTER HOW OLD
>HAS THE POTENTIAL TOIMPROVE OUR BRAIN POWER.
>♪